# Proxmox VE NAS and Gaming VMs - 04 - Proxmox Extras  

The system should be up, running and tuned. But there's still a bit more before moving to VMs/Containers.

## Table of Contents:
> **Hint:** Github has a drop-down automatic TOC, find the **≡** icon on the top-left

* ^ [README](README.md)  (*links to* ***other pages***)
* 04 - Proxmox Extras (***this page***)
    + [04.A. Importing Existing ZFS Pool](#04a-importing-existing-zfs-pool)
    + [04.B. Useful Utilities](#04b-useful-utilities)
    + [04.C. Networking](#04c-networking)
* \> [05 - Proxmox GPU Passthrough](05.ProxmoxGPUPassthrough.md) (*next page*)

Adding a non-root account
SSH authentication via keys

---

## 04.A. Importing Existing ZFS Pool(s)

*If you're not using ZFS, skip this OR if you don't have any ZFS pools from previous installs.* However it may still be useful for you later on if you're reinstalling Proxmox and want to keep your old pools. 

I created a ZFS striped pool with my 2 4TB "scratch" disks on a previous TrueNAS Scale system that has data I want to access now (it has my .iso files and support utilities). It's very easy to import this existing pool into Proxmox. As long as you remember the name of the pool. If you don't, the following won't help you figure it out but you should be able to search for that information. 

* Open a root shell 
    + if you have a way to SSH from a terminal, do that via `ssh root@[yourhostip]` ... switching views in the Proxmox UI shell will keep closing the shell
	    + This can be important if your preferred editor is 'nano' as trying to search in 'nano' uses {control} + {w}, which will try to close most browser tabs instead
	    + 'vim' users won't have this problem
    + if you don't, then you can use the web shell, just make sure you're done with what you're working on before clicking out of it each time (or open a new tab just for the shell)
* `zpool import` (no other arguments) to see a list of pools available to import. 
* `zpool import [poolname]`
    + ie, in my case the pool name is 'xfer', so the command would be `zpool import xfer`
    + if this command complains that the pool was in use before (mine was created on a TrueNAS machine), add -f like: `zpool import -f xfer`
* At this point the pool should be mounted at the filesystem root (ie, "/xfer") and visible in the Proxmox UI. I am not doing any configuration of the mount point or parameters as this is just being used to access files temporarily until I can move them to their final resting place. 

---

### 04.B. Useful Utilities

* `dev_tree.pl`
    + replacement for `iommu_list` (see next) using Perl ... enhances that by adding a tree display of attached devices
    + Can display all USB, Network and Block devices (NOT USB4 or Thunderbolt yet, I don't have the hardware to test)
    + Default will display all devices in order of IOMMU Groups
    + Various output formats
    + Written in Perl, all needed CPAN modules are installed on Proxmox by default
    + Get it from this repo via [this link](https://github.com/Jahfry/Miscellaneous/blob/main/VFIO/README.md#2-device-tree). 
* `iommu_list` ... which devices are in what IOMMU groups
    + used in later pages here, doesn't install system packages, add this one if you're following along past this
    + uses a simple `cat` script and parses the info
    + grabbed from [ArchiWiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/PCI_passthrough_via_OVMF) (unsure where it originated, seen in many places)
    + once done, just use `iommu_list` to see the output

```bash
# Copy/Paste this block into a root bash shell
FILE=/usr/local/bin/iommu_list
if test -f "$FILE"; then
    echo; echo "WARNING: $FILE exists. Edit it manually."; echo
else
    echo; echo "Creating new file: $FILE"; echo
    cat << EOF > $FILE
#!/bin/bash
shopt -s nullglob
for g in \`find /sys/kernel/iommu_groups/* -maxdepth 0 -type d | sort -V\`; do
    echo "IOMMU Group \${g##*/}:"
    for d in \$g/devices/*; do
        echo -e "\t\$(lspci -nns \${d##*/})"
    done;
done;
EOF
    echo; echo "Done. $FILE contents:"; echo
    cat $FILE; echo
fi
chmod 755 $FILE
```


*These are optional*

I'm trying to not add much more to the base Proxmox host. These are lightweight. Skip these as desired, just edit the `apt` command before running it. 

* `sudo` ... allow non-root users to run root commands
    + Allows locking down root from SSH
    + Also allows user to `sudo -i` (prompts **user password**) instead of `su -` (prompts for ***root password***)
    + I'll document adding a non-root user in the next section
* `htop` ... better interface for `top` with scrolling and vi-like searching with '/'
* `iotop` ... see what is actively using system IO, search for use information

```bash
# Copy/Paste this block into a root bash shell
apt install sudo htop iotop
```

---

## 04.C. Networking

*Optional.* This depends on your system. Adapt/skip as needed. This uses the devices on "[02. Hardware](02.Hardware.md)" as a referrence. *This is just a basic default setup for dual NICs, feel free to adapt to your system.*

**Background:** ... (these are items you'll need to adapt to your system's hardware & network)

1. NIC 1 is an Intel I211 seen as "enp6s0" with IPv4 address 10.0.2.1/18
2. NIC 2 is a Realtek RTL8125 seen as "enp7s0" with IPv4 address 10.0.3.1/18
3. See **your devices** with `lspci | grep -i Ethernet`

* Proxmox UI > 'Datacenter' > '[your hostname]' > 'Networking' (middle column) > 'vmbr0' > press blue "Edit" button
* *Make 'vmbr0' VLAN aware* on "enp6s0"... this is for future projects
    + Select 'vmbr0'
    + Press blue "Edit" button ... leave alone anything not changed below
    + 'VLAN aware:' = {checked}
    + 'Bridge Ports:' = "enp6s0" (or whatever your device is) ... on my machine "vmbr0" defaults to my 2nd NIC on "enp7s0", which works, but not what I wanted. Set this up how you prefer. 
    + *Optional:* add a comment here for future referrence (example: "NIC 1 - Intel I211 - 1Gbps")
    + *(leave other items as they are)*
    + 'OK'
* *Add 'vmbr1'* ... **if you have multiple NICS** ... gives VMs an optional bridge on NIC "enp7s0" separate from the NIC used for the host on "enp6s0"
    + Press blue "Create" button > select "Linux Bridge"
    + 'Name:' = "vmbr1"
    + 'IPv4/CIDR:' = {the IP/subnet you assign to enp7s0} ... you'll need to know your network/subnet for this, it should be the same IP as what enp7s0 is assigned. In my case: "10.0.3.1/18"
    + 'Gateway (IPv4):' = {empty} ... only 1 default gateway allowed per network, this is on the same net as the other
    + 'IPv6/CIDR:' = {empty unless you have this}
    + 'Gateway (IPv6):' = {empty}
    + 'Autostart:' = {checked} (default)
    + 'VLAN aware:' = {checked}
    + 'Bridge ports:' = {enp7s0} ... change to match your second NIC
    + 'Comment:' = "NIC 2 - RTL8125 - 2.5Gbps"
    + press blue "Create" button at bottom of the pop-up
* Press blue "Apply Configuration" button to activate any changes made above

---
> [^ [TOP OF PAGE](#proxmox-ve-nas-and-gaming-vms---04---proxmox-extras)] ... ***End:*** *Proxmox VE NAS and Gaming VMs - Proxmox Extras*
> 
> \> NEXT: [05 - Proxmox GPU Passthrough](05.ProxmoxGPUPassthrough.md)
>
> \< PREV: [03 - Proxmox Tweaks](03.ProxmoxTweaks.md)
