# Proxmox VE 7.1 NAS and Gaming VMs - 06 - VM Windows 10

This is the process for getting a basic Windows 10 VM installed on Proxmox with GPU passthrough. 

**NOTES:**

* This is a BASIC setup, just to get one running. 
* Any tuning to the VM for performance will be in a later page.
* VMs using PCIE Passthrough can't be migrated to another machine (*maybe* if the other machine is identical, can't test) using Proxmox Cluster services. 

...

## Table of Contents:
> **Hint:** Github has a drop-down automatic TOC, find the **≡** icon on the top-left

* ^ [README](README.md)  (*links to* ***other pages***)
* 06 - VM Windows 10 (***this page***)
    + [06.A. Resources](#06a-resources)
    + [06.B. Upload ISOs to Proxmox](#06b-upload-isos-to-proxmox)
        - [06.B.i. Windows 10 ISO](#06bi-windows-10-iso)
        - [06.B.ii. VirtIO Drivers](#06bii-virtio-drivers)
    + [06.C. Create the VM](#06c-create-the-vm)
* \> [07 - ](07..md) (*next page*)

---

## 06.A. Resources

Credits to these various links. I didn't use one single guide, so my directions include a mix from these. You shouldn't need to read all of these in detail but they may be useful if you need to figure something out.

* Proxmox Wiki
    - [Windows 10 guest best practices](https://pve.proxmox.com/wiki/Windows_10_guest_best_practices) (I don't use their disk type, see below)
    - [qemu Guest Agent](https://pve.proxmox.com/wiki/Qemu-guest-agent)
* [Heiko's Blog - Blacklisting Graphics Driver](https://www.heiko-sieger.info/blacklisting-graphics-driver/) ... note: actually gives a better method *not* using the blacklist file
* [Passthrough Primary GPU with Proxmox 7.1](https://www.weisb.net/passthrough-primary-gpu-with-proxmox-7-1/)
* [Reddit r/homelab Guide](https://www.reddit.com/r/homelab/comments/b5xpua/the_ultimate_beginners_guide_to_gpu_passthrough/)
* [Mathew DePorter - Proxmox PCI Passthrough](https://matthewdeporter.com/proxmox/proxmox-pci-passthrough/)
* [qubidt/proxmox_passthrough_guide.md](https://gist.github.com/qubidt/64f617e959725e934992b080e677656f)

## 06.B. Upload ISOs to Proxmox

Proxmox recently added a feature to directly upload .iso files, including from a remote host without intermediate downloads. 

* Log in to the Proxmox web UI
* Go to 'Datacenter' > [your hostname] > 'local (your hostname)' (this is the storage device under the host) > 'ISO Images' (in the middle column)

### 06.B.i. Windows 10 ISO

To upload the main ISO, Open [this Microsoft page](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/software-download/windows10ISO) (in another tab/window).

* *Option 1:* If using Linux PC, Mac or mobile device you can get a link directly to an ISO image that contains multiple Windows 10 editions (21H2 is around 5.8GB), *skipping the need to download to your PC first and then upload to Proxmox.* This may also work on a Windows PC but, if not, see next option. 
    + Click through the options until you get a "Download" link
    + Copy the URL for that link
    + In Proxmox 'ISO Images' click 'Download from URL'
    + 'URL:' > Paste in the iso link
    + Click 'Query URL' to fill out 'File name:' (you can modify the filename)
    + Click 'Download' in the Proxmox UI
    + When you see 'TASK OK' in the pop-up, click the 'X' on the pop-up to close it (not the main browser tab)
* *Option 2:* If browsing from a Windows machine you *may* (I'm not able to test whether this page redirects you) have to use the "Media Creation Tool", download the .iso to your machine, and then upload it to Proxmox via these steps. One possible advantage to this is you can get an image for a specific edition of Windows 10, which lowers the file size by <>1GB (almost 5GB instead of almost 6GB). 
    + Download the Media Creation Tool
    + Run through it until you can select the option to download a .iso, wait for the download to complete.
    + 'File:' > select the file from your PC
    + *optional*: Edit the filename (like 'Win10-64bit-21H2-Pro.iso')
    + Click 'Upload' in the Proxmox UI
    + When you see 'TASK OK' in the pop-up, click the 'X' on the pop-up to close it (not the main browser tab)

### 06.B.ii. VirtIO Drivers

* Go to the [official site](https://fedorapeople.org/groups/virt/virtio-win/direct-downloads/) (in another tab/window). 
    + Decide if you want the Stable or Latest drivers (I pick Stable unless I know otherwise). 
    + Click whichever you chose (they *can* be on the same version). 
    + Copy the link address for 'virtio-win-[version number].iso' to your clipboard
        - at time of writing, this was 'virtio-win-0.1.217.iso', but look for newer stable
        - you can copy the link for 'virtio-win.iso' without a version number in it
        - they're the same file, but having the version number may be better so you can have different versions available or easily know when there is a newer version available
    + In Proxmox 'ISO Images' click 'Download from URL'
    + 'URL:' > Paste in the iso link
    + Click 'Query URL' to fill out 'File name:' (you can modify the filename, for instance to add the version if you copied the link without version in the name)
    + Click 'Download' in the Proxmox UI
    + When you see 'TASK OK' in the pop-up, click the 'X' on the pop-up to close it (not the main browser tab)

## 06.C. Create the VM

**IMPORTANT:** I'm not saying these settings are optimal. Only that they worked. I'll walk through all options. [The Proxmox Wiki](https://pve.proxmox.com/wiki/Windows_10_guest_best_practices) has more information about what is done below. 

### 06.C.i Initial VM Settings

* In the Proxmox UI, click "Create VM"
* 'General'
    + 'Node:' = your Proxmox hostname. If you have multiple nodes, you should already know which to pick. Default otherwise.
    + 'VM Id:' = default ("100" if this the first VM)
    + 'Name:' = "Win10-VFIO" (can be whatever you want)
        - No spaces/etc, this needs to be valid as a DNS host name
        - I've had cases on other systems where long descriptive names caused namespace problems
        - Keep it concise while descriptive enough for you later
    + 'Resource Pool:' = empty (we haven't set any) [[wiki](https://pve.proxmox.com/wiki/User_Management#pveum_resource_pools)]
    + 'Advanced' (checkbox at bottom) = {unchecked} (you can use this to set the VM to start at boot, do this later if you want it)
* 'OS'
    + 'Use CD/DVD disc image file (iso)' = selected
    + 'Storage' = "local" (we haven't set up others)
    + 'ISO Image' = click the Windows 10 ISO image from before
    + 'Use physical CD/DVD Drive' = *not selected*
    + 'Do not use any media' = *not selected*
    + 'Type:' = "Microsoft Windows"
    + 'Version:' = '10/2016/2019' ('10' is Windows 10, '2016' is Windows Server 2016, '2019' is Windows Server 2019 ... 11/2022 is for Windows 11 / Windows Server 2022)
* 'System'
    + 'Graphic card:' = "VirtIO-GPU"
    + 'Machine:' = "q35"
    + 'BIOS:' = "OVMF (UEFI)"
    + 'Add EFI Disk:' = {checked} (default)
    + 'EFI Storage:' = "local-zfs" (puts the image on the boot drive, we haven't added other storage yet)
    + 'Format:' = {disabled}
    + 'Pre-Enroll keys:' = {checked} (default)
    + 'SCSI Controller:' = "VirtIO SCSI"
    + 'Qemu Agent:' = {checked}
    + 'Add TPM:' = {NOT checked} (default) ... this can prevent Windows 11 upgrade nags and can be enabled later on. 
* 'Disks'
    + 'Bus/Device:' = "VirtIO Block" "0"
        - You can also go with "SCSI" here as Proxmox wiki and other guides suggest
        - [Recent discussion on Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/Proxmox/comments/tyiorg/ryzen_gpupci_usb_passthrough_advanced/) that has me trying Block instead of SCSI
    + 'SCSI Controller:' = {disabled input, value is "VirtIO SCSI Single"} (set on 'System' tab)
    + 'Storage:' = local-zfs (default, also set on 'System' tab)
    + 'Disk size (GiB):' = 32 (default, feel free to change, I'm attaching a dedicated 1GB NVME later for apps/games)
    + 'Format:' = {disabled input}
    + 'Cache:' = "write back" 
        - *not* "write back (unsafe)"
        - if you don't have a UPS, use "none"
        - Old thread reports "none" is actually faster, so worth a test anyway, later
    + 'Discard:' = {checked}
    + 'Advanced' (checkmark at bottom) = {checked}
    + 'SSD Emulation:' = {disabled} ... if using "SCSI" instead of "VirtIO Block" it will be enabled, {check} this
    + 'IO thread:' = {checked} ... won't have much effect currently, may help later if adding more disks
    + 'Read-only:' = {unchecked} (default)
    + 'Backup:' = {checked} (default)
    + 'Skip replication:' = {unchecked} (default) ... not using replication currently anyway
    + 'Async IO:' = "Default (io_uring)" (default)
* 'CPU'
    + 'Sockets:' = "1" (default)
    + 'Cores:' = "8" ... note, this is on a 5950X with 16 cores, adjust as needed
    + 'Type:' = "host"
        - "host" passes the Host CPU as-is, which locks this VM to this type of CPU unless changed, giving full feature set
        - "Default (kvm64)" works, especially if you want to move this VM to a different type of CPU later, uses Pentium 4 instructions
        - Using Debian Bullseye + Brave browser I was unable to scroll the list to see "host"
        - You can type in the field (ie, type "host" in the field then select from the drop-down)
     + 'Advanced' {checkbox} = unchecked
* 'Memory'
     + 'Memory (MiB):' = 32768 ... 32GiB, adjust to what you want based on your total RAM
     + 'Advanced' {checkbox} = *checked*
     + 'Minimum memory (MiB):' = 32768
     + 'Shares:' = {disabled}
     + 'Ballooning Device:' = *unchecked* ... causes issues with Windows VMs and isn't good for some applications (like games)
* 'Network'
     + 'No network device' {checkbox} = unchecked
     + 'Bridge:' = "vmbr0"
     + 'VLAN Tag:' = {empty} (shows "No VLAN" but don't type that)
     + 'Firewall:' = {checked} (default)
     + 'Model:' = "VirtIO (paravirtualized" ... if problems use E1000
     + 'MAC address:' = empty (shows "auto" but don't type that)
     + 'Advanced' {checkbox} = {unchecked}
* 'Confirm' ... click "Finish"

## 06.C.ii Add VirtIO iso as a CD-ROM

This will allow a second ISO to be used during first boot that contains the VirtIO drivers.

* Select the new VM in the left column. If you used the settings above as-is, it will be named "100 (Win10-VFIO)"
* Notice the "Summary" view has a "Notes" widget
    - You don't *need* to do anything here
    - It's very handy to document whatever you need
    - Markdown syntax is accepted
    - Click the gear icon on the right of this widget and paste in this to bookmark the guide you're using:  
        > \[Proxmox VE 7.1 NAS and Gaming VMs\](https://github.com/Jahfry/Miscellaneous/tree/main/proxmoxVE71)

---
> [^ [TOP OF PAGE](#proxmox-ve-71-nas-and-gaming-vms---06---vm-windows-10)] ... ***End:*** *Proxmox VE 7.1 NAS and Gaming VMs - VM Windows 10*
> 
> \> NEXT: [07](07..md)
>
> \< PREV: [05 - Proxmox GPU Passthrough](05.ProxmoxGPUPassthrough.md)
